This video is brought to you by brilliance problem solving based website end app
with a hands on approach,
improve your stem skills while having a great time learning at Brill org slash
biographics moral name in a bit
In the 125 years since Alfred Nobel's estate first established the Nobel prize.
Cambridge university has had a remarkable group of laureates on it for their
work.
Their names are synonymous with excellence and innovation merchant Russell,
Francis Creek Neils bore Milton Friedman.
There are literally a hundred more yet,
despite all those brilliant minds that have walked the Cambridge ground,
one of them has ever won two Nobel prizes.
He marched into an unknown branch of science,
which few even knew existed at the time and blazed a trail for those
who would come after him.
He wildly expanded the definitions of what we knew about genetics and human
existence.
He kickstarted a scientific revolution that has raged well into the 20 de first
century.
And incredibly he did all of that with the humility of a man who was just
tinkering with some toys in his garage.
His name was Frederick Sanger and his brilliant career in biochemistry
shaped the modern world.
Frederick Sanger was born August the 13th,
1918 in the village of Renco in lost share England.
His father who was also named Frederick was a physician who had studied St.
John's college.
Cambridge Freds was something of an innovation himself long before his son
started investigating peptide chains.
He worked with Scotland de ya to develop a forensic test would differentiate
between human blood and animal blood more than a decade before he had any
children. Fred S traveled to China as an Anglican medical missionary.
He served a local community in a mission hospital,
spreading the gospel wherever he could,
but in 1912 with the country on the brink of revolution and Frederick in poor
health, he returned to England to open his own practice.
It was here that he met the love of his life.
Cecille Croson in the most romantic way possible.
He was called to treat her septic finger.
They married in 1916 and Cecille gave birth to two sons,
Theo and Frederick over the next two years,
Fred Sr and Theo both had a tremendous impact on the direction of Frederick his
life, Theo love nature.
And so he often brought along his younger brother for outdoor adventures and
animal investigations.
The boys would hunt for nuts in the family pond or SCO the yard for birds nest
between his father, the doctor, and his brother,
the naturalist Frederick couldn't help, but develop a scientific curiosity,
a thirst for discovering the nature of things,
whether they intended to or not.
The elder men of his household pushed him towards rational investigation,
even at a young age. The other early influence on Frederick's life was religion.
Although his father had left China as a Protestant by the time Theo and
Frederick were running around the yard,
the household had distinct Quaker influences.
Cecily's father was a wealthy cotton merchants. And when he passed away,
he left the Sangers both money and religious reading material,
perhaps because of his time in China,
which featured simmering revolutionary violence and distrust of Protestant
missionaries, senior founds, the Quaker perspective appealing he converted.
And in 1923, he moved the now family of five to tan worth in Arden,
near Birmingham, to be close to a stronger Quaker community.
Quaker believes colored most aspects of young Frederick's childhood. Hi,
his siblings were always taught to say their prayers.
When they reached school age,
Frederick was tutored by a Quaker governance in 1927. At the age of nine,
Frederick was shipped off to boarding school, his destination,
a Quaker school known then as Down's proprietary school,
he stayed there until 1932.
When he began boarding at Branston school endorse it.
It was a Branston where Sanger's Quaker roots,
where finally joins his butting love science
At Branston Sanger began to flourishes the students of the sciences Branston
operators on a less structured educational system than many of its peer
institutions. At the time,
instead of crushing its pupils with structure and discipline school allowed
students to work on a more flexible schedule,
offering free periods and allowing the boys themselves to prioritize which
subjects they wanted to focus on.
Additionally,
there was a new headmaster thorough code who eliminated the popular practice of
beating instead as administration chose to emphasize growth through self
discipline.
So while the school has a record of some boys taking advantage of their new
freedom by lolly gagging arounds,
the shift away from teaching through violence was undoubtedly a boon to a young
Quaker like Fred Sanger,
who began to prefer the benefits of self-guided tinkering and experimentation
Sanger reportedly enjoyed a good relationship with Fraser Highlands,
the bronze and biology master,
who would often take the out on adventures in nature.
He got along even better with the chemistry master Henry Jeffrey Ordish,
a man who was an accomplished photographer, electrician and motorcyclist.
He ran the chemistry lab at Branston,
which he had personally renovated and wired inside a portion of an old stable
Sanger's quietly surging aptitude for the sciences propped up by Branson's E
this on self-discipline and individual work.
Put him on a trajectory towards success at the time borders set to take and
pass their school certificate to graduate and qualify for university.
And Sanger spent so much time working and studying alongside Highland and Ordish
that he took and passed his certificate a year early as if that wasn't enough.
He scored seven credits on his exam,
which was at the time the highest score in the history of the school.
While most of his peers were stressing over their own certificate.
Sanger had a final year to tinker in the school laboratories and think about his
future free of any pressure from exams.
His father expected him to become a doctor and continue the sang a family
legacy. And with high test marks and natural aptitude for the sciences,
this was arguably the most logical choice.
Frederick considered his options during his free year while continuing to
conduct experiments with or in the stable lab in 1936,
he appli and John's college at Cambridge.
It was the natural choice for sang as it was the very same school attended by
his father, his uncle,
and his most influential teacher with his strong test scores.
His acceptance was all bit of formality.
His choice of studies on the other hands, while that was quite up in the air.
Frederick arrived at the conclusion that his father's career while rewarding
would not enable him the sort of intellectual freedom he had grown accustomed to
in his formative years, his father was always running around,
checking on patients,
serving the community to him that sounded burdensome as he had throughout his
childhood Frederick, the younger wanted to explore.
So when he arrived at Cambridge,
he placed himself in a natural sciences course track studying chemistry,
physics, and maths.
He found himself intrigued with the ideas of earnest Baldwin.
One of his university teachers who proposed that solving certain mysteries in
the world of chemistry might unlock new understanding of biological systems.
As Sanger marched through his university education.
He continued to gravitate toward the emerging field of biochemistry prior to
the 20th century science and technology hadn't yet advanced far enough for
mankind to really understand the extent of the relationship between biology and
chemistry, but by the late 1930s,
Sanger and his mentors were beginning to inch towards a complete understanding
of the living world.
By the time he completed his bachelor's degree in 9 39 though, biochemistry,
wasn't the only thing inching closer towards Frederick Sanger.
Europe had become embroiled in world war II and scientists and science
departments everywhere were turning their focus away from lab experiments
towards the growing access threat in Europe.
Sanger was no stranger to the Nazis during his free Europe Brandston he had
spent a few weeks at a partner boarding school called shul asylum in Southern
Germany as part of an exchange program.
He saw firsthand our German students were told to open their day with prayers.
Then follow them with a reading from mine comp his religious sensibilities found
this juxtaposition to be quite shocking as a great as though his on
war was clear.
He had affirmed his religious upbringing at university by becoming a member of
the peace pledge union and associated with an anti-war group within Cambridge's
family of scientists. So when Britain declared war on Germany in 1939, Sanger,
wasn't just avoiding conflict. He was a true well established pacifist,
and he had the receipts to prove it. After appearing before a military tribunal,
he was granted conscientious, objector status.
Even if Sanger wasn't going to war though,
the war was gonna come to him after taking an extra biochemistry class at
Cambridge,
she was temporarily dispatched Winford hospital in 1940 to help staff a war
hospital. As an orderly, after a few months,
he was able to return to Cambridge where he began gearing up for his PhD,
Sanger hunker down in his beloved biochemistry department,
partnering up with Albert Newberger, his mentor together,
the power undertook a study that focused on two fascinating subjects,
bine metabolism and the hydrogen content of a potato.
Now I realize that no one comes to biographics for our expert analysis of
protein synthesis,
but I'll try and do my very best to at least not in the direction of Sanger's
thesis work Bly is one of nine essential amino acids,
meaning it's required for human function,
but it isn't efficiently produced in the human body in mass quantities.
In other words,
this means that it's something we have to incorporate into our diets.
In the case of lysine, it's often consumed via meat, eggs, beans, or lenss,
and the body uses it to synthesize key proteins.
Sanger tried to unravel the nature of lyce metabolism meant a complex series of
experiments centered around feeding it to wraps his were inconclusive.
The scientific community didn't know enough about amino acids or proteins at
that point.
And it would be another 30 years before biochemists would unlock the lysine
mystery, but Sanger nonetheless received credit for his thesis.
This was called the metabolism of the amino acid lycine in the animal body.
He defended his work to Charles Harrington and Albert Al in
1943, receiving his PhD at the age of 26.
At the same time he was crafting his thesis.
He and Newberger began a separate experiment aimed at aiding the war efforts,
and it examines variation in nitrogen levels for different types of domestic
potatoes,
Sanger eventually describes the potato experiment is one that was complet for
more practical problems.
The paper was published in biochemical journal in September, 1942.
Now you might not be studying potatoes or in a lab at Cambridge,
but you can still learn more about science through today's sponsor brilliance.
Brilliant is a problem solving based website and app with a hands on approach.
They've got over 60 Interac courses in math, science, and computer science.
Now you've heard me talk about brilliant before,
and whether you are a student looking to get ahead or a professional,
Keenon building some skills, you should definitely check them out. Now,
maybe you've wanted to learn about neural networks,
essentially how computers can program themselves while brilliant have a course
all about that. And it teaches you this through easy to access puzzles,
and it does it in plain English. There's no reading a paragraph a dozen times,
and then still being like what? I don't get it, not with brilliance.
And that's just one example. There's loads of great stuff on their platform,
including daily challenges,
which are a great way to flex your gray matter every day.
Look brilliant is a great compliment to watching videos like this one.
And they'll really help you develop and master even complex technical subjects.
So if you wanna support biographics and get unlimited access to all of
brilliance in depth, maths and science courses,
please add over to brilliant at org slash biographics to get 20% off their
annual premium subscription. And let's get back to it
As if singer didn't have enough going on in his life while he was earning
degrees, writing thesises and supporting war hospitals.
He was also falling in love. Sanger had met Joan Margaret,
how through an anti-war group while pursuing his bachelors at Cambridge while he
was tolling us in John's college.
Joan was a Lester transplant studying economics.
They grew close when Sanger lost both of his parents within a year of each
other, halfway through undergrad,
they were married soon after the war started it on December the 28th,
1940 at St. Mary's church. Inside later,
as he was preparing to defend his doctorate in 1943,
he and Joan were also preparing to welcome their first child Robin into the
world. 1943 is when it all changed for Sanger.
It wasn't just the baby or the PhD.
He also began to earn money as a professional scientist up until our point.
Sanger enjoyed a comfortable life as a student, thanks to his family's wealth.
And eventually the inheritance bequeathed from his parents. Finally in 1943,
Sanger began drawing a real salary,
thanks to the bait Memorial fellowship for medical research,
which subsidized Sangas research into the 1950s with his PhD firmly enhanced
Sanger turned arounds and began with the same man who'd signed off on his
doctorate, newly minted, Cambridge biochemistry,
professor AAL Al's research group at Cambridge was one of the
foremost groups of experts on protein chemistry in the world.
And they were determined to crack the mysteries behind how proteins did what
they did. Not all scientists at the time,
even believed proteins could be mapped, also studied,
but chip believed that they could thus his team got to work.
The team had already been studying insulin when Sanger joined the group.
So he assigned himself the task of isolating and identifying the free amino
groups of insulin through trial and error.
Sanger developed a method using a chemical called dine nitro flu benne,
which was a molecule specifically crafted AKI down into smaller chains of amino
acids. Once he had broken it down into smaller pieces,
he began using a brand new cutting edge technique called partition
chromatography to break down the amino acid chains.
Even further Sanger was eventually left with just two sets of TA amino groups,
phenol, Laine, and glycine,
which suggested to our brilliant S that insulin is the product of two
separate amino acids. Okay. Now, unless you're an actual biochemist,
there's a chance that you don't have the first idea of what any of that meant,
and that's okay.
I'm sure your sharpest attack in whatever it is you do for a living.
All you really need to know about our B Frederick here is that with careful
experimentation over the course of a decade,
he went farther in his understanding of basic protein structure than any human
ever had before.
And he accomplished it all simply by doing what he did best standing at his work
bench tinkering with science by the time Sanger had established,
he knew for sure that insulin had two distinct unchanging peptide chains.
He had already shocked the scientific world at the time,
which was only 75 years ago.
The scientific community had yet to prove that proteins were made up of specific
sequences and not randomized or ever changing amino groups. By the 1950s,
he had attracted other scientists to album,
completely mapped the entire insulin protein. Again,
saying I recognized the usefulness of new applications like paper chromatography
and acid hydrolysis, and used these modern allowances to his advantage.
He partnered with Australian biochemist, EOP Thompson, a fully ma insulin,
a chain that ends in lysing. Similarly partnered with Austrian hands,
topi Toma, the Bline chain.
This was the first time anyone had ever mapped a full protein,
completely redefining modern science's vision of what biochemists could uncover.
I mean, I didn't have any sort of grand ideas like sitting down and saying,
I'm going to sequence a whole protein or anything like that. I mean,
that makes a.
Good story. By 1958,
Frederick sang as world had evolved quite a bit in the 15 years since his PhD,
Joan had given birth again to a son named Peter in 1946,
the medical research counselor had offered him a paid research position in 1951,
arch Martin and Richard sin.
The inventors of partition chromatography had won the 1952 Nobel prize chemistry
D nitro Fluro benne.
The original chemical that Frederick used to break up insulin had been
christened Sanger's Regent. Then finally in 1958,
the Royal Swedish academy of sciences made official what everyone in the
community seemed to already know for revealing the full sequence of a protein
and revolutionizing the human knowledge of proteins and their peptide chains.
Frederick Sanger was awarded the Nobel prize for chemistry Sanger wasn't done
yet though, if anything, his first Nobel validated his exploratory approach.
Sanger wrote to his colleagues years later saying that the 1958 prize had an
important and stimulating effect on my Quin career.
I had remained in Cambridge concentrating only on basic research and dev
avoiding as far as possible teaching or administrative responsibilities.
This recognition of my work gave me renewed confidence and enthusiasm to
continue in this way of life, which I enjoyed
Sanger's insulin revelation should send quakes through the adolescent
biochemistry fields, but ask any Brit about the revolution of the 1960s.
And they'll probably tell you everything you wanted to know about John Lennon or
Roger adultery, but quietly,
while the kinks were ripping fresh chords in north London,
the molecular revolution was well under inside the halls of Cambridge
laboratories. Two years after this final child,
Sally was born in 1960 Sanger moved into the medical research council,
SW you Cambridge facility.
The laboratory of molecular biology Sanger for his part was the head of the
protein division,
but she was hardly the only big name in the building just a few years before
cream formed in 1966,
Cambridge was putting together a super group of their very own Sanger
ACLU. Max Pertz,
John Kendra and Francis Crick all began working out of the L M B
building and they had an unreal opening salvo parrot,
and Kendra won the 1962 Nobel prize for chemistry by expanding on Sangs
earlier work,
studying the structures of Glo proteins quick one and even more high profile
Nobel in 1962 was he and the American partner,
James Watson uncovered the double heli structure of DNA winning the Nobel prize
for physiology and medicine. The lab halls in the LMB were absolutely booming,
cranking out new revelations about the nature of life faster than the scientific
community could process them after Watson and Creek's DNA projection,
much of the team's focus moved from amino acids and proteins, tole acids,
and genetic material with all the discovery going on around him.
Sanger began to feel his interests pulling in a new direction just as he had
spent hours tinkering arounds, unraveling the secrets of proteins.
He now wanted to investigate the nature of nucleic acids.
Sanger viewed an investigation into genetics as the natural evolution of his
investigation into proteins.
He spent much of the 1960s solely quiting messenger RNA,
which in case you forgotten your health sciences from primary school is sort of
like DNA's little brother that helps synthesize new proteins in the 1960s
Sanger and his peers didn't really know that though,
which was why there was such a push to study nucleic acids in the first place by
the early 1970s,
several biochemists from around the world used in vitro protein synthesis to
reverse engineer.
How proteins developed on nucleotides and Sangs completed sequences helped
confirm the first round of RNA hypotheses with RNA. Now,
at least partially unlocked,
Sanger wanted to move on to studying the white whale of the late 20th century
genomics mapping and DNA.
Despite three decades saying are pioneering these signs of organic sequencing.
No one had really attempted to map human DNA and there was a very good reason
for this DNA strands, even for non-humans are massive.
We're talking about thousands of nucleotides for bacteria,
millions for most complex organisms and billions for primates.
So before we could even think about sequencing, anything,
Frederick Sanger had to do what he did best play arounds in his lab and invent
some brands. New scientific methodology. By 1975,
Sanger had the beginnings of a plan.
He began using a manipulated nuclear tide called a Didy nuclear tide to chop
down DNA strands into pieces that were a few hundred nuclear tides long rather
than tens of thousands,
but in Yorky had a similar chemical structure to a regular nuclear tide,
but with one key difference, it could peel chains off,
separating them from the rest of the double helix.
If sang repeated the process enough times,
he could sequence an entire organism's DNA.
And that was exactly what he did slowly but surely he completed the mapping out
of 5,375 nuclear tides of,
of bacteria phage fi X 1 74 in 1977.
It was the first DNA genome to ever be sequenced. Once again,
sang had embarked on a 15 year scientific arty with Watson and Creek's
double helix discovery back in 1962,
that culminated in a seminal moment in human scientific discovery.
Sies 1 74 genome had virtually no practical application,
but it did represent a gateway to the idea that human genetics could
realistically be sequenced and studied the first team through the gateway egg
unsurprisingly.
It was Sangs Cambridge gang after successfully tackling a bacterial genome.
They moved on to map the 16,000 nuclear tides in human mitochondrial DNA
and the 48,000 nuclear tides in bacteria, phage Lambda,
finishing those projects over the next few years by 1980,
the raw Swedish academy of sciences was ready to place Sanger's name an
incredibly rare app for massive contributions to the booming scientific field of
DNA sequencing.
The 1980 Nobel prize for chemistry was awarded to Sanger and his sequencing
partner, Walter Gilbert for their work with nuclear tide basis.
American biochemist,
Paul Berg received credit on the award as well for his parallel work on nuclear
tides and recom D eight.
This was an unprecedented move from the Nobel committee as only four individuals
had ever won multiple Nobels Marie Keri for physics and chemistry.
John Bardine twice for physics and liners polling for chemistry and peace
Sanger became the fourth and final member of the exclusive multiple Nobel club.
It's a fitting honor for a who approached his research with a quite relentless
dignity during his 1980 Nobel speech Sanger explained,
I believe that we have been doing this not primarily to achieve riches or even
honor,
but rather because we were interested in the work enjoyed doing it and felt very
strongly that it was worthwhile. It was a classic line from a classic scientist.
One who knew even from an early age,
that playing arounds at a lab bench was its own reward.
Fred Sanger retired in 1983, just three years after his second Nobel prize.
40 years of revolutionary lab work at bin enough for him. He wanted to go home,
spend time with his wife and grandchildren and work in his garden.
Sang remained disarmingly humble about his career,
which by all accounts was filled with revolutionary discoveries and near
superhuman levels of persistence beyond his two Nobels.
He was elected a member of the Royal society in 1954 and order of the companions
of honor, in 1981,
he was named a commander of the order of the British EMPA awarded the Coley
medal and the order of merit. Oh, and in 1993,
when the British medical research center moved to establish a genome research
center, they named it, the Sanger Institute,
all this from a man who fondly referred to his career as just a chap
messing about in a lab. Sanger did enjoy working on projects,
which is partially why he began looking forward to his retirement so much.
He wanted to swap his beakers for a boat.
And so he did quietly spending the final three decades of his life,
enjoying to I with his family growing plants in his garden.
And by his own words, messing about in boats,
tan lived along and full life.
Enjoy plenty of time with his grandchildren and eventually seeing his work with
DNA sequencing fully realized 20 years after his retirement in 2003,
an extraordinary international team of scientists completed their work on the
human genome.
Having completely mapped out every nuclide responsible for human genetics.
And it had all started decades earlier with Sanger,
a Cambridge laboratory and an insatiable curiosity for knowledge Sanger's wife,
Joan died in 2012 and Sanger passed away the following year on November,
the 19th, 2013, he was 95. The world's mourned,
a Titan of 20th century science.
The New York times labeled him a genetic pioneer while scientific American
crowns. Him, the father of DNA sequencing.
It's an appropriate title for a man whose influence reverberates throughout the
history of science Sangs work with proteins ignited revolution. So vast,
we still haven't fully completed the results nearly 75 years down the road,
his 1977 DNA paper run the Didy sequencing method also called the
Sanger method has been formally cited by other scientific publications.
More than 73,000 times.
The Cambridge laboratory for molecular biology has continued to churn out Nobel
laureates. The British press refers to it as the Nobel factory,
but even there, no one has equaled Frederick Sanger's achievements.
His astounding life of Peerless achievements leaves us all with a critical
question of self-examination.
If we all sat down with a goal in mind and messed about until we got it right,
what could we accomplish? So I really hope you found that video. Interesting.
If you did, please do hit that thumbs up bottom below. Also,
if this is inspired you, why not check out our fantastic science based sponsor.
Brilliant, who I'm gonna link to below and thank you for watching.